Installation
============

To use STEGO, first install R, RStudio and other required programs
------------------------------------------------------------------
MAC:
^^^^

* Install `R <https://cran.r-project.org/bin/macosx/>`_ 
* Install `RStudio <https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/>`_
* Install `Quartz <https://www.xquartz.org>`_

Windows:
^^^^^^^^

* Install `R <https://cran.r-project.org>`_
* Install `RStudio <https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/>`_
* Install `Rtools <https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/>`_

Linux:
^^^^^^

* install `R <https://cran.r-project.org/bin/linux/ubuntu/fullREADME.html>`_

using **sudo apt install** the following:
libcurl, libfontconfig1, libtiff5, liblapack-dev, libblas-dev, libglpk-dev, libudunits2-dev, libgdal-dev libgeos-dev, libproj-dev
and also the gfortran


Sytem requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Recommended to use a 64-bit OS with at least 16GB of RAM, ideally >=32GB. This is needed for the memory intensive merging and annotation steps. 

When running STEGO.R merging and annotation steps, we recommend to limit the number of other running programs to help prevent RAM memory overflow, espeically if you have <32Gb of RAM. 


Setting up the R Project
------------------------
1. From the github repository `STEGO.R <https://github.com/KerryAM-R/STEGO.R>`_ download and unzip the `'Directory_for_Project.zip' <https://github.com/KerryAM-R/STEGO.R/blob/main/Directory_for_Project.zip>`_ and rename the folder.
   - This folder contains instructions on how to process the data and, will be used to set up the R.project environment.
  
2. Open Rstudio
   - Quick tutorial for understanding RStudio environment with this `YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FIrsOBy5k58>`_ video.

3. In RStudio, go to File (top left of the screen) -> New project -> Create the new project in the renamed 'Directory_for_Project' Directory.


    short-cut key for running a line of R code
    
        Mac: Command-shift-Enter
        
        Windows: ctrl-shift-Enter

Understanding the "Directory_for_Project" Folder
------------------------------------------------
Unzip the "Directory_for_Project.zip" file. This folder contains our recommended structure on how to organise your files for each scRNA-seq project. We will refer to these files through out the Tutorial.

This folder contains the following folder:

- 0_Raw_Files
- 1_ClusTCR
- 1_SeratQC
- 1_TCR_Explore
- 1_TCRex
- 2_SCobj
- 3_Analysis
- custom_db
- Figures.Tables
    + Overview
    + QC_Figures
    + TCR and GEX
- Priortization
   + Clustering
      - AG
      - BD
   + EpitopePred
   + ImmunoDom
   + Multi
      - PublicLike
      - private
   + PolyClonal

the user will also have access to the following files 

- Installing.R
- preprocessing.R
- ClusTCR2_large.R
- Merging.Batch.Harmony.R
- Project.Rproj
- STEGO.R 

Downloading and installing STEGO.R
----------------------------------
**Step 1.** File -> New File -> R Script 

**Step 2.** Copy all the R code in this document to the 'untitled' script (top left panel) 

Devtools and BiocManager are required to download the necessary packages from Github and Bioconductor:

::

   install.packages("devtools")
   
   install.packages("BiocManager")
   
   install.packages("usethis")

This line will install STEGO
:: 

   devtools::install_github("KerryAM-R/STEGO.R")

**Step 3.** put the cursor on the install.packages("devtools") line, and hit run (top-right corner of the panel)

**Step 4.** repeat step 3 for install.packages("BiocManager")

**Step 5.** Repeat step 3 for install.packages("usethis")

**Step 6.** repeat step 3 for devtools::install_github("KerryAM-R/STEGO.R")

**STEGO.R not found/API issue**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You will need to create a git token

::

      # Create the token
      usethis::create_github_token()
       
      # Open the .Renviron file
      usethis::edit_r_environ()
       
      # Paste your token into the file
      GITHUB_PAT=insert_your_token
       
      # Close the file and restart R

**Possible installing prompts**

:: 

   When you see this line: "These packages have more recent versions available. It is recommended to update all of them. Which would you like to update?"
   
   Answer with  "1" and hit "Enter". 
   
   On a Mac if you see "Do you want to install from sources the package which needs compilation? (Yes/no/cancel)", answer with  "no" and hit "Enter". This same message will appear as an popup on Windows.
   
   Once all packages are installed, this will be the final section of the installation process. 

Expected final lines once STEGO.R has been correctly installed.

:: 

   R CMD build 
          ✔  checking for file ‘/Users/kerrymullan/Desktop/STEGO_copy.R/Temp/Rtmp0n6xNi/remotes176117593b632/KerryAM-R-STEGO.R-df4640eae1a05f44f3c91ca527215f4af56894ff/DESCRIPTION’ ...
          ─  preparing ‘STEGO.R’:
          ✔  checking DESCRIPTION meta-information ...
          ─  checking for LF line-endings in source and make files and shell scripts
          ─  checking for empty or unneeded directories
          ─  building ‘STEGO.R_1.0.0.tar.gz’
      * installing *source* package STEGO.R’ ...
      ** using staged installation
      ** R
      ** inst
      ** byte-compile and prepare package for lazy loading
      ** help
      *** installing help indices
      *** copying figures
      ** building package indices
      ** testing if installed package can be loaded from temporary location
      ** testing if installed package can be loaded from final location
      ** testing if installed package keeps a record of temporary installation path
      * DONE (STEGO.R)


**Step 7.** Run each of the following the following lines to set up the .Renviron (R environment)

``.rs.restartR()`` # restart R

``getwd()`` # path to current working directory, which will be used for defining where to put the temporary file will be stored.  e.g. /Users/kerrymullan/Documents/GitHub/STEGO (mac)

onto the end of the line add the Temp folder name e.g. /Users/kerrymullan/Documents/GitHub/STEGO/Temp (mac)

*Windows file paths may look differnet from this.*

This will open the .Renviron hidden file
:: 

   usethis::edit_r_environ("project")

**Step 8.** Pasted the following in the .Renviron:

R_MAX_VSIZE=200Gb
TMPDIR = PATH/TO/Directory_for_project/found/with/getwd()/Temp

**Step 9.** Save, close .Renviron and restart R to make the changes take effect. 

``.rs.restartR()`` # restart R

Installing fonts
----------------

::

   # needed to use for the first time :D
   require(extrafont)
   font_import()
   loadfonts()
   
   fonts <- fonttable()
   head(fonts)

Running STEGO.R
---------------
Now the the R environment is set up and the STEGO.R and it's dependencies are installed, we can now run the application.

Run the following lines in R. A window will opened that runs the STEGO.R shiny R application. 

::

   require(STEGO.R)

   runSTEGO()


You are now ready to process your scRNA-seq with scTCR-seq data!

.. note:: 
   If a window doesnt open
      you will need to trouble shoot which packages haven't been installed.


Trouble shooting missing packages
---------------------------------
      
